---
layout: post
title: "Drupal 9: Troubleshooting Cache API issues, Part 1: Xdebug, wodby/drupal, VS Code"
date: 2023-10-25
category: drupal
---
In my 30+ years of programming, my go-to debugging tool has been the judicious usage of `print` commands on the appropriate variables at the appropriate times. Of course, `print` takes many different forms depending on the technology stack and the application model, but the principle remains the same. In very few cases did this approach fail me, and I stumbled across one such case as I was debugging the notoriously tricky Drupal [Cache API](https://www.drupal.org/docs/8/api/cache-api/cache-api). In a nutshell, there was one module, among the dozens of core, contrib and custom ones making up that particular site, that was invalidating the static page cache and preventing pages from being cached. I wanted to find which module was the culprit.

The problem with this issue is that the Cache API is called thousands of times per request - for pretty much every theming function participating in a page render. Further, the caching logic is complex as it involves combinations of cache tags, `max-age` settings, and various other mechanisms that affect the decisions of which caching tables to use and which caching headers to return in the HTTP response.

Trying to pinpoint the particular condition that caused the cache invalidation in this case using `print` statements would have been an inefficient and tedious process, and the client wouldn't have liked to pay for that inefficiency. So I decided to bite the bullet and set up my Xdebug environment to catch the bug red-handed, so to speak. With its pants down, so to speak. To catch it in the act, so to speak.

Here's a high level diagram of the various components at play here. I slightly modiified it from the original at [this other tutorial on the same topic](https://blog.devsense.com/2019/debugging-php-on-docker-with-visual-studio-code).

{% include image.html url="/assets/xdebug.png" width="100%" description="Xdebug within php-fpm container communicates with VS Code IDE on host via port 9003." %}

My development environment is made up of the excellent [Docker-based Drupal stack](https://github.com/wodby/docker4drupal) by Wodby. I can't say enough good things about this framework, which has allowed me to start new Drupal projects, and even adopt legacy ones, on a solid footing without breaking a sweat. The architecture is simple, documentation is clear, customization is easy. I've been able to share development environments with team members using macOS and Windows systems with minimal changes.

The [wodby/drupal-php](https://github.com/wodby/drupal-php) image comes loaded with the Xdebug extension, and it's "only" necessary to configure the right environment variables to activate it. I say "only" because many of the settings are non-obvious and required some experimentation before I could get them running, in addition to a VS Code configuration to match.

Here's my current setup, in the main `docker-compose.yml` file running the full Drupal stack:
```yml
services:
  php:
    image: wodby/drupal-php:$PHP_TAG
    environment:
      PHP_XDEBUG: 1
      PHP_XDEBUG_MODE: debug
      PHP_XDEBUG_START_WITH_REQUEST: yes
      PHP_XDEBUG_CLIENT_HOST: host.docker.internal
      PHP_XDEBUG_LOG: /tmp/php-xdebug.log
    extra_hosts:
      - "host.docker.internal:host-gateway"
```
Here's what the non-obvious settings mean:
- `PHP_XDEBUG_MODE: debug` enables [Xdebug step debugging](https://xdebug.org/docs/step_debug#configure), which is our purpose here.
- `PHP_XDEBUG_START_WITH_REQUEST: yes` means that Xdebug is activated at every request, automatically.
- `PHP_XDEBUG_CLIENT_HOST: host.docker.internal` is the all-important address of the machine running the debugging client - in my case, VS Code on my local machine. [According to documentation](https://docs.docker.com/desktop/networking/#i-want-to-connect-from-a-container-to-a-service-on-the-host), the name `host.docker.internal` is automatically available in Docker 18.03+ Mac/Win, **but not on Linux**. For Linux, we add the stanza `extra_hosts: "host.docker.internal:host-gateway"` which maps that domain name to Docker's gateway IP, which is the Docker host, which is my laptop OS running VS Code :sweat_smile:

But that's only half of the story. The other half is convincing VS Code to act as a debugging client to Xdebug. To do that, we use the [PHP Debug VS Code extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=xdebug.php-debug) and we [customize the Launch configurations](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/editor/debugging#_launch-configurations) to add the Xdebug endpoint. Basically, we create a `.vscode/launch.json` file in the project root with the following content:
```json
{
  "version": "0.2.0",
  "configurations": [
   {
      "name": "Listen for Xdebug",
      "type": "php",
      "request": "launch",
      "port": 9003,
      "pathMappings": {
        "/var/www/html/": "${workspaceFolder}/src"
      }
    }
  ]
}
```
Here's what the non-obvious settings mean:
- `"port": 9003` is the default port that Xdebug hits on the client, and that's where VS Code should be listening for debug events.
- `"pathMappings": { "/var/www/html/": "${workspaceFolder}/src" }` maps the Docker filesystem path `/var/www/html` where the app resides to the actual host path `"${workspaceFolder}/src"` where `${workspaceFolder}` is a [VS Code variable](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/editor/variables-reference).

With these in place, it should be now possible to place a breakpoint in, say, `src/web/index.php` (the Drupal main entrypoint) and catch every request! Select **Run > Start Debugging** or or click the **Listen for Xdebug** configuration in the bottom status bar. We are finally ready to start debugging the Drupal Cache API :ghost:

## Troubleshooting
Of course, this setup didn't come by without many failures and much head-scratching, perhaps even some teeth-clenching. If your 100% guaranteed breakpoint (like one in `src/web/index.php`) is not being hit, then it's time to put on your sleuthing hat :detective:

Check that the Xdebug log is active and connected. Running `docker-compose exec php tail -f /tmp/php-xdebug.log` should show messages like:
```
[112] Log opened at 2023-10-25 06:42:12.885888
[112] [Step Debug] INFO: Connecting to configured address/port: host.docker.internal:9003.
[112] [Step Debug] INFO: Connected to debugging client: host.docker.internal:9003 (through xdebug.client_host/xdebug.client_port). :-)
```
Yes, that final smiley is part of the log :-)

If instead, you see a sad smiley message like:
```
112] [Step Debug] ERR: Could not connect to debugging client. Tried: host.docker.internal:9003 (through xdebug.client_host/xdebug.client_port) :-(
```
Then check that a connection can be established between Xdebug and VS Code. Running `docker-compose exec php nc -zv host.docker.internal 9003` should return a successful response like:
```
host.docker.internal (172.17.0.1:9003) open
```
Anything else is a sign that the Docker container is unable to connect to the host on port 9003. Check your `host.docker.internal` name resolution, check the `launch.json` port setting, turn it off and on again, talk to your rubber duck - you know the drill!
